Previously...
Black Jack Randall is dead.
You've made an enemy here today.
Thank you. I could use a friend.
Jenny found this.
- Sawney.
- Mary Hawkins, Madame.
I'm sure I've heard that name before.
Thought we came here to
prevent a rebellion,
and the head of the rebellion
is Charles Stuart.
God demands that a Catholic
king sit on the English throne.
He'll get us all
killed if we don't stop him.
All we have to do is see to it
that his war chest remains empty.
That was the Minister of Finance!
Perhaps there is some way
I can be of service.
Alex is the younger brother
of Captain Jonathan Randall.
I will have to tell
Jonathan that I've met you.
- Your brother, he isn't dead?
- I certainly hope not.
- sync and corrections by Caio -
- www.addic7ed.com -
We're leaving in a few minutes.
Oh.
I didn't mean to wake you, Sassenach.
Another long night at Maison Elise?
Aye. I fear Prince Charles
has run out of patience
with your husband.
Last night he demanded that I
finally arrange that meeting
he's been wanting with
Minister Duverney.
And he wants it subito.
That's Italian for "right away."
I know what that means.
Well, I suppose it had to
happen sooner or later.
I'm impressed you managed
to delay it all this time.
Do you think Duverney will consent
to a meeting with The Prince?
I have no idea,
but I really have no time for that now.
I must away.
A government inspector's coming
to examine Jared's warehouse,
and then it's a mad
gallop to Versailles,
chess and a blether with Duverney.
Then another mad gallop,
hopefully with the Minister by my side,
to Maison Elise, and then
another night of drink.
And yet more blether with
that loon of a Prince.
Still, I suppose stopping
Charles' rebellion
is worth losing a bit of sleep.
You've lost more than a little
bit of sleep, I'm afraid.
Ah, (SPEAKS GAELIC), Sassenach.
I'll get to close my eyes on the
journey back to the palace.
But, I appreciate your concern.
I ken. I reek of smoke.
Mm, and cheap perfume.
Doesn't exactly help
my morning sickness.
I hung my head out of the
carriage on the way here,
but it was all for naught, it appears.
Go back to sleep, Sassenach.
You and the bairn need rest.
Ye've time before you join
Louise and the ladies for tea.
I would not want to be late for tea.
Ah, it's a tedious business, I grant ye.
You never know, today could
be the day you learn
some bit of vital information
that could stop the chances
of Charles' rebellion from
happening, once and for all.
Well, who's going to give up
this vital piece of information?
Louise? Madame Geyer?
Christ, I don't believe it.
He's gone.
Sawney. Had him since I was a wee lad.
Look, I'm sure he's
around here somewhere.
Have the servants search
the house, Sassenach,
for a wee wooden snake about yon size.
Don't worry.
We'll give the house a
thorough going-over.
I'll leave it in your capable hands.
Give my regards to your ladies at tea.
They're not my ladies.
I can't marry a Frenchman!
Why, is there something
wrong with Frenchmen?
You don't know about Frenchmen?
How they...
You are English. Do you know
what she's talking about?
I'm afraid I don't.
Well, of course you wouldn't.
You're husband's so
g-gentle and so kind.
I mean, I...
I know he doesn't trouble you in...
that way.
Mary, do you mean...
W-what they do in b-bed.
My maid said that a...
a Frenchman's "thing," you know,
they put it right between a lady's legs.
I mean, right up inside her.
- No!
- Yes!
An Englishman, or even a Scot...
Oh, I didn't mean it in that way,
but a man like your husband,
surely he'd never dream
of forcing his wife
to endure something like that.
Mary, I believe we need
to have a little talk.
Men don't do things like
that where I come from.
And where is that?
The moon?
Seaford. In Sussex.
I found this in the, uh...
the attic of my grandmother's
house in Sussex.
So even your
grandmother was a historian.
Well, all families recorded
the births, deaths, and
marriages in the front
- of the family Bible.
- Mm-hmm.
This one only goes back
seven generations,
but according to this,
your beloved husband
got his start in 1746,
when Jonathon Wolverton Randall...
Married Miss Mary Hawkins.
Ma chère, Claire.
Are you all right?
I hope I didn't upset you.
Somewhere in the back of my mind
I must have known.
If Jack Randall had really
died at Wentworth Prison,
he obviously could not
later wed Mary Hawkins
and sire Frank's direct ancestor.
And in that case,
Frank himself would never exist.
Perhaps I hadn't allowed myself
to think about it until now,
but I was faced with
the terrible knowledge
that Frank's very existence
now depended on Jack living
for at least another year.
Welcome home, Madame.
In your absence, you
received three invitations
to dinner parties and
salons for the next week.
A thank you card arrived
from Madame Cholbi
and the search for the little,
wooden snake creature continues,
but no success as yet,
and I-I found this in the kitchen.
I believe it is yours?
I gave this to Suzette to mend.
Suzette?
Did I not ask you to mend...
Did you need something, milady?
No.
I won't apologize for spending
time with your lady's maid,
if ye have a mind to reproach me.
What you do with your
time is your own concern.
Aye, it is.
But, don't you have anything
else you could be doing?
I know Suzette certainly does.
It is the middle of the day, after all.
As a matter of fact, I don't.
Since when did you become
such a priggish scold
when it comes to frolicking
between the sheets?
You can mind you own bloody business,
and remember who runs this house!
Murtagh, I'm...
I'm sorry. That was unforgivably rude.
I'm just...
not myself.
No.
No, you're not.
- Jack Randall is alive.
- What?
No. I saw him lying
dead with my own eyes,
he was bleeding on the stone
floor of Wentworth Prison.
Apparently he has made...
a miraculous recovery.
When we were at Versailles, I...
spoke with the Duke's secretary,
who, as it happens, is Alex Randall...
His brother.
Recovered?
"Injured in the line of
duty" was how he put it.
Jesus wept.
Randall really is the Devil's spawn.
- Ye... Ye havena told Jamie?
- No.
- Good.
- Is it?
Aye, unless ye want him
running back to Scotland
to seek his vengeance
and that would most likely end
up with Jamie being arrested
and hanged whether he
kills Randall or not.
But I'm living a lie.
Hey.
You're keeping a secret to save his life
and if it keeps the lad from
running off in a blind fury
only to meet his maker
at the end of a rope,
I'll be keeping that secret with ye.
Thank you.
Aye.
Now, if you don't mind,
I have some business
with yer maid to finish.
I don't suppose you've ever
thought of birth control?
Control?
Never mind. I'll pick up
something for Suzette.
Our involvement in Austria
has depleted our resources.
The King is not inclined to
fund another foreign adventure,
but I'm here to play chess,
not to debate politics,
and I will have you in three moves.
What is politics...
But chess on a grand scale?
How long have you been planning that?
Since you opened with a Spanish game.
I'm going to get you.
Check.
Huh.
The game is yours... again.
You played well.
But, if I may return
to more pressing matters.
When you and I first met, you
offered to be of service
if ever I needed you.
You know, James, if you desire my help,
it would not be a bad idea to
lose a game once in a while.
I respect you too much to
allow such a cheap victory.
I give you permission
to respect me less.
Now, how can I be of service?
Tell Prince Charles what you told me.
That King Louis has no intention
of funding the rebellion.
You want to discourage Prince Charles
from mounting your rebellion?
Why?
Scotland and our people cannot
bear another failed rebellion.
We must not invade until we're certain
we have the resources
and finances to win.
As Minister, I cannot speak officially
to the emissary of a monarch
not recognized by The King.
- You know that.
- Of course,
but if you were to meet
with Charles unofficially,
in a place that values
discretion above all...
Which would be?
Maison Elise.
Mm.
I have not been there in months.
My wife...
She need not know.
You can honestly tell her
you're simply out with me...
playing chess.
Ah, Madonna!
What a pleasure to see you again.
Are you always that friendly
with your so-called enemies?
Sometimes mutual interests
force us to associate
with people we do not like or trust.
Please, come inside and
tell me how can I help you.
I'm interested in stopping a
pregnancy from happening.
Ah.
It's not for me.
Ah, bon. Bon, bon.
Well, perhaps then I would use mugwort.
Delphine, can you check in the back?
Aconitum Napellus.
Monkshood.
Woop-oop-oop-oop-oop.
You must take care, Madame.
I know this is poison.
I'm not aware of any medicinal
uses for monkshood.
Nor am I, Madonna.
- Yet you sell it in your shop.
- I have it in my shop.
What I sell to my customers who,
usually in a moment of passion,
want to poison their
enemies, is bitter cascara.
The effect is most immediate.
The stomach seeks to
purge itself, and...
then, well, you get the idea.
Then it makes the enemy suffer visibly,
but it doesn't kill them.
Precisely.
Poisoner attributes the recovery
to the intervention of a priest
or some sort of counter-spell.
No one dies, and the
customer is satisfied.
So, you're a canny businessman
and a humanitarian.
Who is the contraceptive
for, if I may ask?
- My lady's maid.
- Oh.
It is usually the other way around.
The maid buys a
preventative for her lady
so the lady can maintain
the pretense of fidelity.
Well, I am an unusual lady.
Or, at least, I used to be.
What, madam?
Oh, it's nothing.
I feel since I've come to Paris...
my life has got more and more
conventional by the day,
as, I suppose, have I...
But it's of no concern.
I wonder if you have ever considered
putting your medical talents to use?
L'Hôpital des Anges is
always looking for help.
What is L'Hôpital des Anges?
The charity hospital
down near the cathedral.
The nuns who run it do their best,
but they must rely on
medical volunteers.
Not all of them as perceptive as you...
Or as in need of helping others.
For your maid.
This is why ye rushed home and
harried me along with ye?
You don't even have to come inside.
You can stay here with the carriage.
Jamie will not like this.
He'll be happy if I'm happy.
Or you'll be needing to go in there.
Broch Tuarach?
And how can we help you, Madam?
Is one of your servants here today?
No, as I mentioned earlier
to Sister Angelique,
I have some medical skills I
thought might be useful here.
Indeed.
It was urine, undoubtedly,
but without chemical tests,
or even litmus paper,
what conceivable use
could a urine sample be?
Can you tell from what
she suffers, Madam?
Possibly.
I suspected the
cause straight away,
but I took a moment to recall
the 18th century term for diabetes.
I believe she has...
Sugar sickness.
And can you tell whether
she will recover?
She won't.
I'm afraid she won't last the month.
This is what Monsieur Parnelle said.
I have never seen a woman
who knew the science of urinoscopy.
Perhaps you could help Sister Angelique
dress the wounds of a
young boy with Scrofula?
His Majesty has seen fit to approve
the Spanish crown's request
for a sizeable loan,
which, in turn...
has seen French merchants,
uh, taking their businesses
out of the country
to avoid tax increases
we have had to levy.
I understand completely, Monsieur.
Wars are expensive.
Aye. Very expensive. In blood and gold.
Exactly.
Which is why I would never approach
His Majesty, King Louis,
with empty promises
or empty pockets.
Rest assured,
I have already secured the
vast majority of funds
for our cause.
You have?
Oh, yes.
Funds nearly sufficient to
finance our entire campaign.
I see.
Perhaps I misunderstood the
position of Your Highness.
I hope you will forgive my error.
I have been in secret negotiations
with several wealthy
and highly-influential
members of the British aristocracy
who believe my father
is the rightful heir
to the English throne.
Mark me,
these patriots are willing
to fund his return to glory,
and have already pledged
an amount to the cause
nearly sufficient to accomplish
that divine purpose.
My friend James is astonished.
I cannot tell you how happy I am
to see the look of relief and
shock upon your face, James.
Those are the very words, Your Highness.
"Relief and shock."
I, too, share in, uh, happy edification.
But, Highness, in light
of this, uh, happy news,
I must ask as to the role
you see for my King?
Should King Louis support our cause,
I offer France an alliance with Britain
in the aftermath of victory.
Britain and France
allies?
Oh, it would change the world, Highness.
Yes, but France will have
to stand with us now.
Add your funds to what
I've already secured.
Help me secure victory.
Close the gap between what
I have and what I need
and I will give you the world.
I will speak to the King on your behalf,
but I will first need some evidence
of your English patriots
and their "ample funds."
And you shall have it.
- Let us celebrate.
- Hm.
Claire?
Claire!
Suzette!
Yes, Milord.
She has not returned since she went out
with Monsieur Murtagh this afternoon.
Merci.
Jamie?
I'm so glad you're here.
I've had the most wonderful day.
I lanced two boils,
changed filthy dressings,
and saw my first case
of full-blown Scrofula.
The carriage ride home was
full of delightful tales
of blood and pus and
gangrenous toenails.
Where have you been?
Certainly not at Madame
Louise's for tea.
At L'Hôpital des Anges.
Do you know it?
The charity hospital?
Aye.
What took you there?
I'll just go and find
myself something to eat.
I told ye he wouldn't like it.
I heard they were in need
of people with my skills.
So, as I had time today,
I went and volunteered.
Mother Hildegarde, she's the matron,
she's a complete force of nature.
She was a musical
prodigy and goddaughter
of King Louis' great-grandfather.
She's not going to make it easy for me,
but when she saw me taste the urine,
the tides began to turn.
I haven't won her over yet, but I will.
What's the matter?
I thought you'd be happy for me.
Did ye now?
Well, yes, I did.
What's wrong?
You're with child, for one.
You could catch a filthy disease.
What of the bairn?
Have you not thought of that?
Of course I've thought of the baby.
I would only treat patients
that have injury, not diseases.
Or at least diseases I
know I can't catch.
Why take the chance?
It has been a long time
since I have felt useful.
I need to feel a sense
of accomplishment.
I need a purpose.
Purpose?
I thought our purpose for being
in this godforsaken city
was to stop the rebellion.
It is. That hasn't changed.
Then tell me, how will lancing
boils and tasting urine
help us to save Scotland?
Well, what would you have me do, Jamie?
Go to Maison Elise with you and Charles?
Or do you want me to run the
wine business in your place?
What I want, when I come
home with a problem,
is to be able to turn
to my wife for help.
Tonight, The Prince told Mr. Duverney
that he's secured significant funding
from several prominent Englishmen
with which to fund the rebellion.
Could that be true?
But The Prince offered Duverney
an alliance with England.
All I could do was sit there
as the wine turned sour in my stomach.
But that's impossible.
Britain and France won't become
allies for another century.
All I know is Charles is
more canny than he seems.
He's keeping secrets,
(SPEAKS GAELIC) what to do about it.
I'm sorry, Jamie. Truly, I am.
I know this
has all been my idea:
changing the future,
stopping the rebellion...
and right now, all of
it, it falls on you,
but I will try and help you
in any way that I can.
So I believed.
That's why I came home looking for you.
Instead, you were out indulging yourself
with poultices and potions.
I assure you,
there was no indulging involved.
I was helping people.
But yes, that makes me feel good,
gives my day meaning.
What about me?
I spend my days and nights
wheedling and flattering a man
so I can gain his secrets
and undermine his cause.
When do I get to feel good?
When do I get to find meaning in my day?
I knew that wasn't gonna go well.
So sad.
How can there be love in the marriage
when love leaves the bed?
Huh?
A lady's maid knows what
does, and does not,
occur in her mistress' boudoir.
Ooh!
First of all, I'm a
dirty Scottish bastard.
Okay, then. Take me to the police
- and I will find your wife.
- Ah, you speak English.
And I will tell her that
you rut with whores.
No, no, no. No police.
And my wife would not believe you,
but Madam Elise will
likely not appreciate
having a thief for a servant boy.
N-n-not Madame Elise, no.
Please, she... she will kill me
if she thinks I steal
from her customers.
Aye, she's not a forgiving kind.
I don't do it every night.
J-Just when we are very busy
and, like, the gentlemen are very drunk.
I'm not interested in your methods,
but I am interested in you.
Hey, I-I'm no whore.
I... I don't want that, either.
Then what?
I want to offer you a job, ye wee fool.
A job?
Doing what?
Exactly what you have been doing.
Put me down!
Stop!
You can keep all of this,
but from now on,
you're going to do all
your stealing for me.
You wee bastard. That's my snake.
How much do you pay?
Who the hell are you?
What are you doing in my house?
You said the same thing to Suzette.
That doesn't make me feel very special.
But the ladies at Maison
Elise were always very...
very generous when I
give them compliments.
So was Suzette. She gave
him the chicken leg.
Yeah.
Well, that's very interesting,
but I still don't know who you are.
Take him up to the servants'
quarters, Murtagh.
Suzette is preparing a bath
and has some nightclothes
for him to wear.
Wait.
Good night, Madame.
Ah, Christ.
And watch your (SPEAKS GAELIC).
Bed and bath?
He's a pickpocket. His name's Fergus.
Well, actually it's
Claudel, but we agreed
that wasna very manly.
So, you invited him into our house?
I hired him from Maison Elise.
Hired him?
Because every fine house needs
a pickpocket, I suppose?
It's part of my plan.
We need information that
I cannot get directly
from The Prince.
Information that comes
in the form of letters
from his father, from other
potential financiers,
and most importantly, from
these wealthy Englishmen,
if they do even exist.
So, Fergus steals the letters, and...
Aye, and we copy them,
and then he puts them back
before anyone notices
they've gone missing.
That's a good plan.
Thank you.
Well, good night.
As the days
passed, our house settled
into a routine that kept us all busy.
Fergus spent his time,
with Murtagh's help,
stealing letters to and from The Prince.
Jamie's days were spent out
with Prince Charles...
Now, we drink.
Who continued
to be long in rhetoric
and short on specifics.
My days, in between social engagements,
were spent in the hospital
where I began to develop an appreciation
of Mother Hildegarde's
medical knowledge.
Jamie and Murtagh's time was
spent trying to piece together
the puzzle of the Jacobite rebellion
and discover if there really
was an English conspiracy
willing to fund the cause,
or if it was all a ruse
by a desperate prince
trying to restore his father's throne.
He must get these letters
back to the tavern
before they're missed.
Is that King James'
signature at the bottom?
I recognize his hand, by now.
Everything else is in code.
The seal had been removed
at least three times
before I took it off myself.
Yeah, we're not the only ones interested
in the Stuart correspondence.
Can you decode it?
Most of the codes are fairly simple.
Usually only talking about
family gossip and such.
Suppose they'd rather
not let anyone know.
I think I can work this one out.
When I can see straight, that is.
Wha... What the devil is this?
It's music, ye dolt.
I know music when I see it.
But what's it doing in a letter?
I was trying to puzzle
that one out, myself.
"A Song of the Country."
The lyrics are about a
bonnie day in a meadow.
Just another code?
Maybe, but nothing in the code
has anything to do with the notes.
Maybe it's not a code.
Perhaps some German friend
of Charles just sent him
a piece of music to enjoy.
Aye, but this message is in German,
but was sent from England.
A code in music?
Aye.
Maybe tomorrow you can ask around
for a music teacher or composer
that can speak German.
There's somebody I know who, uh...
who might be able to read it...
But you're not gonna like it.
The skin is pink, with good granulation.
There's no bad smells or dark streaks,
but his urine is very dark and odorous,
and he's incredibly warm.
Perhaps a secondary infection?
Bladder or appendicitis?
Mm.
There's no abdominal tenderness.
Bouton.
No, you are right.
It isn't that.
But that's almost healed.
It's not infected.
No?
You see? A pocket of putrefaction.
Shall I summon Monsieur Forez?
No, I can handle it.
I'll need a small scalpel, some
alcohol, and cloth, please.
While the tiny entrance
wound had healed cleanly,
the deeper wound had festered
and formed a pocket of pus
around the intrusion,
buried in the muscle tissue
where no surface
symptoms were visible...
To human senses, at least.
Forceps.
Voila.
Jamie...
what are you doing here?
I, uh...
I need help.
Musically speaking.
Well, you did say Mother
Hildegarde kens music.
I was hoping...
Wondering... if there was
something odd about the music.
The way it's written.
Can you assure me what you're doing
is neither illegal nor dangerous?
I can assure you,
if my husband is asking,
then it's for a good reason.
That is the basic melody.
It then repeats itself in variations.
You know,
I have seen some things
reminiscent of this.
Yes, an old German friend
of mine, Herr Bach,
has done work very similar to this.
Johann Sebastian Bach?
I'm surprised you have heard of him.
He sends me things now and again.
He calls them "inventions,"
and they are really quite clever,
but I'm afraid his music
is not the sort to endure.
Clever, but no heart.
This is a clumsy version of this.
"Goldberg Variationen."
"The Goldberg Variations."
Now, you see here,
your mysterious composer has
repeated the same melody
as Herr Bach... almost...
but changed the key each time.
The key...
and that's unusual?
Oh, yes.
Five changes in such a short piece,
and some changes for
no reason whatsoever.
Hm.
No musical reason.
The key is the key.
- Aye.
- What key?
The musical key.
Whoever wrote this had a
diabolical sense of humor.
Oh, aye, diabolical.
Two flats means you take
every second letter,
beginning at the start of the section.
Three sharps means you
take every third letter,
beginning at the end.
Does it make sense?
Aye.
Aye, it does.
"I have successfully
concluded negotiations
with our three partners,
all of whom are willing to
contribute to our cause."
So, the English conspirators are real?
Aye.
"I can guarantee the amount of £40,000
will be made available to you."
£40,000.
It's a sizeable amount, right enough,
but it's not enough to
fund an entire war.
So, Charles was lying to Duverney.
Exaggerating. Duverney is smart enough
to expect a certain amount of
that in a business like this.
40,000 may not fund the
war, but it may be enough
to convince Duverney and The King
that the Jacobites have a chance.
"I will be back in Paris
at the month's end,
and am eager to finally
meet you face-to-face
to solidify our arrangement."
And then it's just "S."
Aye. One letter left over.
A signature, I reckon.
- S...
- Sandringham.
It's the Duke. I'm sure of it.
The Duke's had secret dealings
with Dougal for years.
Dougal is a committed Jacobite.
He's playing both sides
against the middle.
He may well be hedging
his bets for and against
a Stuart restoration.
If we can meet with Sandringham,
convince him this is a bad investment...
You know what this means?
We figured it out.
This calls for a celebration.
- Uh, whiskey...
- Sandringham, lass.
If Jamie sits down with
him and his secretary,
you know what will happen.
He'll find out Black Jack Randall
is still alive.
You need to tell him, and
you need to tell him now.
I can't tell you how good
it feels to make progress
after fighting feathers for so long.
We still have problems to solve,
but we'll solve them too.
To...
Mother Hildegarde,
without whom
our enemies would remain unknown to us.
To my wife...
who's always there when I need her.
- I...
- What is it, Sassenach?
I just love seeing you so happy.
- sync and corrections by Caio -
- www.addic7ed.com -